.Dd April 7, 2022
.Dt AJMON 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ajmon
.Nd monitor automated ansible playbook runs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ajmon
.Op Fl J | H
.Op Fl f Ar file ...
.Op Fl o Ar fields , ...
.Op Fl s Ar fields , ...
.Op Ar table
.Op Ar filter ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
takes as input JSON files from ansible playbook runs and formats
the information for display to a terminal.
Using ansible's
.Li json
callback plugin, results can be stored in a directory on the filesystem.
.Nm
can read, filter, sort and tabulate the information for display.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl J
Produce output in JSON format.
.It Fl H
Suppress headers in output making it more easily parsed by scripts.
.It Fl f Ar file
Specify a JSON input file.
This can be used multiple times.
.It Fl o Ar fields, ...
A comma-separated list of table fields to display.
.It Fl s Ar fields, ...
A comma-separated list of table fields to sort the rows by.
.It Fl h
Show a brief usage summary of the program.
.It Fl V
Show version of program.
.El
.Sh TABLES
When specifying a table, table names are case-insensitive and can be
abbreviated to just their initial characters.
Many of the tables show information derived from the initial
.Li gather_facts
task or other fact gathering tasks.
.Nm
is, therefore, reliant on the presence of these tasks' output somewhere in the
input JSON files.
In the following lists of fields, a
.Sq +
is used to mark those fields that are included in the default output while
.Sq \-
is used to mark those that are elided by default.
.Ss Summary
This is the default table if no filter is specified.
Available fields are as follows.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta CHANGED Ta The number of tasks resulting in a change.
.It + Ta FAILURES Ta The number or tasks that failed, including ignored and rescued failures.
.It - Ta IGNORED Ta The number or tasks that failed where the failure was ignored.
.It - Ta RESCUED Ta The number or tasks that failed but where processing continued following a rescue block.
.It - Ta FATAL Ta The number or tasks that failed.
.It + Ta OK Ta The number of tasks that resulted in no change.
.It + Ta SKIPPED Ta The number of tasks that were skipped.
.It + Ta DATE Ta The date when the playbook was run.
.It - Ta TIME Ta The time when the playbook was run.
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.El
.Ss Tasks
Given a filter that selects a single host, the default is to show this table.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta NUMBER Ta A sequence number of the task.
.It + Ta STATUS Ta The output status in an abbreviated form.
.It - Ta ACTION Ta The ansible module used for the task.
.It + Ta DESCRIPTION Ta Description of the task.
.El
.Pp
Sequence numbers can be used in filters to provide detailed output for a
particular task.
The status field remains blank for tasks that resulted in no change,
.Sq C
for changes and
.Sq F
for failed tasks.
.Ss Fs
This table shows details of local filesystems reported in the gathered facts.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta DEVICE Ta The system device.
.It + Ta FSTYPE Ta The type of filesystem.
.It + Ta TOTAL Ta The total amount of space on the filesystem.
.It - Ta SIZE Ta ?
.It + Ta USED Ta Amount of space currently in use.
.It + Ta AVAIL Ta Amount of space available for use.
.It + Ta CAPACITY Ta Percentage of space in use.
.It + Ta MOUNTPOINT Ta Directory at which the filesystem is mounted.
.El
.Ss Net
This table shows details of network interfaces reported in the gathered
facts.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta INTERFACE Ta The network interface.
.It + Ta IP Ta The IPv4 address assigned to the interface.
.It - Ta NETMASK Ta The IPv4 netmask associated with interface.
.It - Ta IPV6 Ta The IPv6 address assigned to the interface.
.It + Ta TYPE Ta The device type of the interface.
.It + Ta SPEED Ta The speed of the connection.
.It - Ta MTU Ta The maximum transmission unit size.
.It + Ta MAC Ta The ethernet address of the interface.
.El
.Ss OS
This table shows details of the installed operating system on the host.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta SYSTEM Ta The name of the operating system,
.It + Ta DISTRIBUTION Ta The name of the operating distribution, e.g. Debian
.It + Ta VERSION Ta The version of the distribution.
.It - Ta MAJOR Ta The major version of the distribution.
.It - Ta FAMILY Ta The operating system distribution type, e.g. RedHat.
.It + Ta KERNEL Ta The version of the kernel, such as of Linux.
.It - Ta PACKAGE Ta The native packaging system used.
.It - Ta SERVICE Ta The native init system used.
.It - Ta UPTIME Ta The machine uptime in seconds.
.El
.Ss Python
This table shows details of the Python installation used by ansible.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta IMPLEMENTATION Ta The Python implementation, e.g. CPython.
.It + Ta VERSION Ta The python version number.
.It + Ta BINARY Ta The filesystem location of the Python executable.
.It - Ta MAJOR Ta The major version number.
.It - Ta MINOR Ta The minor version number.
.It - Ta MICRO Ta The micro version number.
.It - Ta LEVEL Ta The patch level.
.El
.Ss Cpu
This table shows details of the computer processor.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta ARCH Ta The name of the architecture, e.g x86_64.
.It - Ta MACHINE Ta The machine type.
.It + Ta MEMORY Ta The amount of RAM.
.It + Ta CORES Ta The number of cpu cores.
.It + Ta COUNT Ta The number of threads per core.
.It + Ta PRODUCT Ta The product type of the machine.
.It - Ta FORM Ta The form factor of the machine.
.El
.Ss Swap
This table shows details of sansible-playbookwap space.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta MEMORY Ta The amount of RAM.
.It - Ta ALLOC Ta The amount of allocated swap space.
.It - Ta RESERVED Ta The amount of reserved swap space.
.It + Ta FREE Ta The amount of free swap space.
.It + Ta TOTAL Ta The total amount of swap space.
.El
.Ss Virt
This table shows details of virtualisation.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta ROLE Ta Whether the host serves as a host or guest.
.It + Ta TYPE Ta The particular virtualisation style in use, e.g. kvm.
.El
.Ss Docker
This table presents information from the
.Qq docker_image_info
or
.Qq podman_image_info
ansible task.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta REPOSITORY Ta The repository used to build the image.
.It + Ta TAG Ta The image tag.
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta CREATED Ta The date and time when the image was created.
.El
.Ss Packages
This table presents information from the
.Qq package_facts
ansible task.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta NAME Ta The name of the package.
.It + Ta VERSION Ta The version of the packaged software.
.It + Ta RELEASE Ta The release number for the actual package.
.It - Ta EPOCH Ta The epoch number for the package.
.It - Ta ARCH Ta The architecture for which the package was built.
.It - Ta SOURCE Ta The package system in use, e.g. rpm.
.El
.Ss Services
This table presents information from the
.Qq service_facts
ansible task.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta NAME Ta The name of the service.
.It + Ta STATE Ta Whether the service is active.
.It - Ta STATUS Ta The status of the service.
.It - Ta SOURCE Ta The init system in use, e.g. sysv.
.El
.Ss Zpool
This table presents information from the
.Qq zpool_facts
ansible task.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta NAME Ta The name of the pool.
.It + Ta SIZE Ta The size of the pool.
.It + Ta ALLOC Ta Data physically present on disk.
.It + Ta FREE Ta Unused space.
.It + Ta FRAG Ta Percentage data fragmentation.
.It + Ta CAP Ta Percentage of pool capacity in use.
.It + Ta DEDUP Ta Data deduplication ratio.
.It + Ta HEALTH Ta Health of the pool.
.El
.Ss Zfs
This table presents information from the
.Qq zfs_facts
ansible task.
It can be useful to invoke the task with an ansible loop taking the names of
pools.
.Bl -column "X" "FIELDXXXXXXX" "DescX" -offset left
.It + Ta HOST Ta The name of the host.
.It + Ta NAME Ta The name of the dataset.
.It + Ta USED Ta Amount of space in use by the dataset.
.It + Ta AVAIL Ta Space available in the dataset.
.It + Ta REFER Ta Data logically referenced in the pool.
.It - Ta ATIME Ta Whether access times are enabled.
.It - Ta COMPRESSION Ta Compression algorithm, if any, in use.
.It - Ta COMPRESSRATIO Ta Compression ratio for existing stored data.
.It - Ta DEDUP Ta Whether deduplication is enabled.
.It - Ta QUOTA Ta Space allotted to the dataset.
.It + Ta MOUNTPOINT Ta The mountpoint for the dataset.
.El
.Sh FILTERS
Following the table, all subsequent positional arguments are treated as filter
specifications.
A filter can be in one of several forms:
.Bl -tag -width "field!=value" -compact -offset indent
.It hostname
A literal machine hostname.
.It number
A task number, this is only applicable to the tasks table.
.It field=value
Compare a specific field to a literal value.
.It field!=value
Compare a specific field to a literal value.
.It field>value
Numeric of lexicographic comparison of a field.
.It field<value
Numeric of lexicographic comparison of a field.
.It field~regex
Match string represenation of field against a regular expression.
.It field!~regex
Negative match of field against a regular expression.
.El
Only table rows where all filters evaluate to true will be displayed.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Summarise results where one or more tasks failed.
.Dl ajmon 'fail>0'
.Pp
Dump JSON extract corresponding to task 37 on example host.
.Dl ajmon -J example 37
.Pp
List results of all template tasks run on the example host.
.Dl ajmon tasks act=template example
.Pp
Get a list of the different system models in use.
.Dl ajmon cpu -H -o prod -s prod | uniq
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width 6n
.It Pa /var/log/ansible
By default, this is where
.Nm
looks for log files.
Log files are json files that can optionally be compressed with
.Xr gzip 1 .
.It Pa /etc/ansible-json-monitor.conf
This is a configuration file used to point
.Nm
to an alternative location for the log files.
For example, the following contents would reaffirm the defaults:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
path = "/var/log/ansible"
.Ed
.El
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr ansible 1 ,
.Xr ansible-playbook 1 ,
.Xr ansible-pull 1
